<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">

<head><title>Asynchronous Programming with Twisted</title></head>
<body>

<h1>Asynchronous Programming with Twisted</h1>

<p>This document is a introduction to the asynchronous programming model, and
to Twisted's Deferred abstraction, which symbolises a 'promised' result and
which can pass an eventual result to handler functions.</p>

<p>This document is for readers new to Twisted who are familiar with the
Python programming language and, at least conceptually, with core networking
conepts such as servers, clients and sockets. This document will give you a
high level overview of concurrent programming (interleaving several tasks) and
of Twisted's concurrency model: <strong>non-blocking code</strong> or
<strong>asynchronous code</strong>.</p>

<p>After discussing the concurrency model of which Deferreds are a part, it
will introduce the methods of handling results when a function returns a
Deferred object.</p>

<h2>Introduction to concurrent programming</h2>

<p> All computing tasks take some time to complete, but for the most part that
time is not noticeable to either a user or another process that is waiting for
some result. There are two reasons why a task might take enough time for the
delay to be an issue: </p>

<ol>
<li>it is computationally intensive (for example factorising large numbers)
and requires a certain amount of CPU time to calculate the answer; or</li>
<li>it is not computationally intensive but has to wait for data that
is not immediately available before it can produce a result.</li>
</ol>

<h3>Waiting for answers</h3>

<p>A fundamental requirement of network programming is that you must have a way
of waiting for data.  (That's largely true of database programming, too.)
Imagine you have a function that sends an email summarising some information.
This function needs to connect to a remote server, wait for the remote server
to reply, check that the remote server can process the email, wait for the
reply, send the email, wait for the confirmation, and then disconnect.</p>

<p>Any one of these steps may take a long period of time. Your program might
use the simplest of all possible models, in which it actually sits and waits
for data to be sent and received, but in this case it has some very obvious
and basic limitations: it can't send many emails at once; and in fact it can't
do anything else while it is sending an email.</p>

<p>Hence, all but the simplest network programs avoid this model. You can use
one of several different models to allow your program to keep doing whatever
tasks it has on hand while it is waiting for something to happen before a
particular task can continue.</p>

<h3>Not waiting on data</h3>

<p>There are many ways to write network programs.  The main ones are:</p>

<ol>
    <li>handle each connection in a separate operating system process, in
    which case the operating system will take care of letting other processes
    run while one is waiting;</li>
    <li>handle each connection in a separate thread<span class="footnote">There
    are variations on this method, such
    as a limited-size pool of threads servicing all connections, which are
    essentially just optimizations of the same idea.</span> in which the
    threading framework takes care of letting other threads run while one is
    waiting; or</li>
    <li>use non-blocking system calls to handle all connections
        in one thread.</li>
</ol>

<h3>Non-blocking calls</h3>

<p>The normal model when using the Twisted framework is the third model:
non-blocking calls.</p>

<p>When dealing with many connections in one thread, the scheduling is the
responsibility of the application, not the operating system, and is usually
implemented by calling a registered function when each connection is ready to
for reading or writing -- commonly known as <strong>asynchronous</strong>,
<strong>event-driven</strong> or <strong>callback-based</strong>
programming.</p>

<p>In this model, the earlier email sending function would work something
like this:</p>

<ol>
  <li>it calls a connection function to connect to the remote server;</li>
  <li>the connection function returns immediately, with the implication that
  the notify the email sending library will be called when the connect has
  been made; and</li>
  <li>once the connection is made, the connect mechanism notifies the email
  sending function that the connection is ready.</li>
</ol>

<p>What advantage does the above sequence have over our original blocking
sequence? The advantage is that while the email sending function can't do the
next part of its job until the connection is open, the rest of the program can
do other tasks, like begin the opening sequence for other email connections.
Hence, the entire program is not waiting for the connection.</p>

<h3>Callbacks</h3>

<p>In <i>synchonous programming</i>, a function requests data, sits around and
waits for the data, and finally gets moving again when the data has been
produced. With <i>asynchronous programming</i>, your code merely
<strong>initiates</strong> a request for some data and then gets to
<strong>delegate</strong> the responsibility for dealing with that data (when
it's finally ready) to some separate <em>callback</em> function.</p>

<p>When an asynchronous application calls a data-producing function, it
supplies that function with a reference to a separate callback function for the
data-producing function to call when the data is finally ready to return. The
data-producing function does <i>not</i> return the data to the original
caller. Instead, it supplies that data as an argument to the callback function
when it makes the promised call to it. The original caller has delegated the
callback function with the responsibility of dealing with the data and
continuing whatever processing the caller had in mind for the data once it has
been produced.</p>

<a name="deferreds" />
<h2>Deferreds</h2>

<p>Twisted uses the <code class="API"
base="twisted.internet.defer">Deferred</code> object as a manager for your
asynchronous callback sequence. Your client application attaches to the
deferred object a reference to some function to which it has delegated the
responsibility for dealing with the results of the asychronous request once
those results are available. Your application should also entrust some function
(possibly the same one) with the responsibility for dealing with an error that
results from its request instead of data. Such an
<strong>err</strong>or-handling call<strong>back</strong> function is known as
an <strong>errback</strong>.</p>

<p>Your application can also attach a series of functions that process the results
and pass their own results on to the next guy. Such a series is known as a
<strong>callback chain</strong>), and should be used with another a series of
functions that are called if there is an error in the asychronous request
(known as a series of <strong>errbacks</strong> or an <strong>errback
chain</strong>). The asychronous library code calls the first callback when the
result is available, or the first errback when an error occurs, and the
<code>Deferred</code> object then hands the results of each callback or errback
function to the next function in the chain.</p>

<h2>The Problem that Deferreds Solve</h2>

<p> It is the second class of concurrency problem &mdash; non-computationally
intensive tasks that involve an appreciable delay &mdash; that Deferreds are
designed to help solve.  Functions that wait on hard drive access, database
access, and network access all fall into this class, although the time delay
varies.  </p>

<p> Deferreds are designed to give Twisted programs a way to wait for data
without hanging until that data arrives. They do this by providing a simple
management interface libraries and applications to delegate the responsibility
for dealing with possibly delayed data and errors to callbacks and errbacks,
respectively. By returning a Deferred object, your Twisted-based library code
knows that it can always make its results available by calling <code
class="API" base="twisted.internet.defer">Deferred.callback</code>. If an error
crops up, your code will be able to have that unfortunate situation dealt with
by calling <code class="API"
base="twisted.internet.defer">Deferred.errback</code>
instead. Twisted-compatible applications have to do their part, however. They
must set up the results handlers for the Deferred object by attaching to it the
callbacks and errbacks they want called with results, in the order they want
them called.</p>

<p> The basic idea behind Deferreds, and other asynchronous solutions as well,
is to keep the CPU as active as possible.  If one task is waiting on data,
rather than have the CPU (and the program!) idle waiting for that data (a
process normally called &quot;blocking&quot;), the program performs other
operations in the meantime, confident that its callback and errback will deal
with the data once it is ready to be processed. In Twisted, a function signals
to the calling function that there is no immediate result by returning a
Deferred as its result. When the data is available, the program activates the
callbacks on that Deferred to process the data in sequence.</p>

<h2>Deferreds - a signal that data is yet to come</h2>

<p>In our email sending example above, a parent function calls a function to
connect to the remote server. Asynchrony requires that this connection
function return <em>without waiting for the result</em> so that the parent
function can do other things. So how does the parent function or its
controlling program know that the connection doesn't exist yet, and how does
it use the connection once it does exist?</p>

<p>What Twisted uses to signal this situation is, of course, our versatile
<code class="API">twisted.internet.defer.Deferred</code> object. When the
connection function returns, it signals that the operation is incomplete by
returning a Deferred rather than the actual handle to the connection.</p>

<p>The Deferred has two purposes. The first is that it says &quot;I am a
signal that the result of whatever you wanted me to do is still pending.&quot;
The second is that you can ask the Deferred to run things when the data
does arrive.</p>

<p>You can picture a function that returns a Deferred as acting like a
librarian who responds to a patron's question ("Are these mushrooms
poisonous?") with a handwritten note saying, "I don't have your answer off the
top of my head, but let me know where I can call you with the answer when I
have it."  The caller to the function does the equivalent of the patron
scribbling a phone number on the note by attaching a callback to the
Deferred. An equivalent of a deferred chain is where the patron writes several
numbers on the note, and the person answering the phone at the first number
responds to the answer ("They're highly poisonous") with another answer ("It's
too late to use another recipe, our dinner party is canceled") that the
librarian relays to whomever answers the phone (some disappointed dinner guest,
perhaps) at the second number. Note that the library patron has been able to
wander off and forget all about this matter in the meantime; such is the beauty
of asynchronous programming!</p>

<h3>Callbacks</h3>

<p>The way you tell a Deferred what to do with the data once it arrives is by
adding a callback &mdash; asking the Deferred to call a function once the data
arrives.</p>

<p>One Twisted library function that returns a Deferred is <code
class="API">twisted.web.client.getPage</code>. In this example, we call
<code>getPage</code>, which returns a Deferred, and we attach a callback to
handle the contents of the page once the data is available:</p>

<pre class="python">
from twisted.web.client import getPage

from twisted.internet import reactor

def printContents(contents):
    '''
    This is the 'callback' function, added to the Deferred and called by
    it when the promised data is available
    '''

    print "The Deferred has called printContents with the following contents:"
    print contents

    # Stop the Twisted event handling system -- this is usually handled
    # in higher level ways
    reactor.stop()

# call getPage, which returns immediately with a Deferred, promising to
# pass the page contents onto our callbacks when the contents are available
deferred = getPage('http://twistedmatrix.com/')

# add a callback to the deferred -- request that it run printContents when
# the page content has been downloaded
deferred.addCallback(printContents)

# Begin the Twisted event handling system to manage the process -- again this
# isn't the usual way to do this
reactor.run()
</pre>

<p>A very common use of Deferreds is to attach two callbacks. The result of the
first callback is passed to the second callback:</p>

<pre class="python">
from twisted.web.client import getPage

from twisted.internet import reactor

def lowerCaseContents(contents):
    '''
    This is a 'callback' function, added to the Deferred and called by
    it when the promised data is available. It converts all the data to
    lower case
    '''

    return contents.lower()

def printContents(contents):
    '''
    This a 'callback' function, added to the Deferred after lowerCaseContents
    and called by it with the results of lowerCaseContents
    '''

    print contents
    reactor.stop()

deferred = getPage('http://twistedmatrix.com/')

# add two callbacks to the deferred -- request that it run lowerCaseContents
# when the page content has been downloaded, and then run printContents with
# the result of lowerCaseContents
deferred.addCallback(lowerCaseContents)
deferred.addCallback(printContents)

reactor.run()
</pre>

<h3>Error handling: errbacks</h3>

<p>Just as an asynchronous function returns before its result is available, it
may also return before it is possible to detect errors: failed connections,
erroneous data, protocol errors, and so on. Just as you can add callbacks to a
Deferred which it calls when the data you are expecting is available, you can
add error handlers ('errbacks') to a Deferred for it to call when an error
occurs and it cannot obtain the data:</p>

<pre class="python">
from twisted.web.client import getPage

from twisted.internet import reactor

def errorHandler(error):
    '''
    This is an 'errback' function, added to the Deferred which will call
    it in the event of an error
    '''

    # this isn't a very effective handling of the error, we just print it out:
    print "An error has occurred: &lt;%s&gt;" % str(error)
    # and then we stop the entire process:
    reactor.stop()

def printContents(contents):
    '''
    This a 'callback' function, added to the Deferred and called by it with
    the page content
    '''

    print contents
    reactor.stop()

# We request a page which doesn't exist in order to demonstrate the
# error chain
deferred = getPage('http://twistedmatrix.com/does-not-exist')

# add the callback to the Deferred to handle the page content
deferred.addCallback(printContents)

# add the errback to the Deferred to handle any errors
deferred.addErrback(errorHandler)

reactor.run()
</pre>

<h2>Conclusion</h2>

<p>In this document, you have:</p>

<ol>
<li>seen why non-trivial network programs need to have some form of concurrency;</li>
<li>learnt that the Twisted framework supports concurrency in the form of
asynchronous calls;</li>
<li>learnt that the Twisted framework has Deferred objects that manage callback
chains;</li>
<li>seen how the <code class="API" base="twisted.web.client">getPage</code>
function returns a Deferred object;</li>
<li>attached callbacks and errbacks to that Deferred; and</li>
<li>seen the Deferred's callback chain and errback chain fire.</li>
</ol>

<h3>See also</h3>

<p>Since the Deferred abstraction is such a core part of programming with
Twisted, there are several other detailed guides to it:</p>

<ol>
<li><a href="defer.xhtml">Using Deferreds</a>, a more complete guide to
using Deferreds, including Deferred chaining.</li>
<li><a href="gendefer.xhtml">Generating Deferreds</a>, a guide to creating
Deferreds and firing their callback chains.</li>
</ol>

</body></html>
